Welcome back recruit for your last lesson on Python basics working with files to conclude this section
we're going to discuss this more practical aspect of Python which is opening reading and writing two
basic text files.
You never know in the field as an agent.
You may need to open text files programmatically and then read or write to them.
Python has builtin capabilities to open basic text files.
Later on we're going to discuss other file types such as see espie files or pedia files.
For now let's explore the builtin capabilities in Jupiter's notebook for allowing us to work with basic
files.
Let's begin by seeing how we can open a file.
The key for this is the open function and the open function takes in the file path to a text file for
it.
Now we're going to focus on files that are located in the same directory as the notebook or that PI
script you're using.
So let's imagine that we're trying to open a text file that doesn't actually exist.
So I'm going to make up some new name.
Go ahead and make up some new name of a text file.
Make sure that it doesn't actually exist on your computer.
And we're going to assign this to some variable called Eriphyle.
Now when I run this I get back as we would expect an error and this error is file not found or otherwise
known as error number two here and it says no such file or directory.
This make up some text file.
This is basically indicating one of two possible things.
Either the name of the file is wrong so maybe you just accidentally misspelled something here as far
as that text.
Or more likely you didn't provide the correct file path.
So in our case we're trying to reach a text file that's in the same location as this notebook.
If you ever want to figure out what directory this notebook is located in.
You can type in PWT NMT cell shift enter and it'll return back the actual location you are in and then
you can use this to understand the file path that you need to save that text file to later on we're
going to see how to open text files that are located in different parts of your computer.
So right now make sure that the tests underscore file that txt file is located in the same directory
as this notebook.
So we're going to say my file is equal to open and you should be able to fine test file thought T.
In the same location as this working of simple text files notebook and as a check for that.
You should also be able to have auto complete this.
That's a good indication that the text the text files there so we run this and always successfully open
this text file and there's various methods of reading off of this text file.
The first one is to say my file not read and this is going to return the entire contents as a string.
So here I can see one giant string.
All the contents in the text file.
This is a good choice for smaller files.
However if you have a very large text file you may not want to grab everything as a single string.
So keep that in mind.
In other thing you should keep in mind is if you try to read this file again you'll notice that it returns
back a blank string instead of the file contents.
The reason for that is because every time you read the file you can imagine that there is a cursor going
through the entire file and at the very end of your first reading it ends up at the very end of the
file so the cursor is at the end of the file and then when you read again the cursor being at the end
there's nothing left for it to read.
So what we do instead is we have to reset the cursor and we can do that by saying my file dots then
call the seek method.
Passen 0.
And you'll see a zero being returned.
Basically this resets the cursor to the very beginning of the file so index 0 and then you can call
my file read again and you'll see the contents of the file.
Notice here how we're getting this special escape character backslash.
And recall from the strings lesson that this actually means there's a new line there because so many
files often have line breaks.
People use them as separators and instead of reading everything as a single string what we want to do
is get a list that represents every line in the file.
To do that we're going to reset ourselves.
I will say seek 0 and then we will type in my file and will use read lines and what this does is it
returns back a list where every item is a single line so it uses the natural breaking of a new line
to indicate the lines of the text file.
Now that we've discussed opening local files in the same directory as a notebook.
Let's discuss in general how to type out file locations.
A good way to understand how file locations work on your operating system is again typing P.W. the inside
of a cell running.
And you can see the syntax that Python is going to expect for you to pass in the file path.
Let me go ahead and paste some examples here.
All right so I'll copy and paste it some examples here so we can discuss the differences.
When working on a Windows computer versus a Mac OS or Linux computer you've noticed here that when I
typed in p w the I got this set of double backslashes that actually indicates that I'm currently working
on a Windows computer for Windows.
You need to use the double backslash so that Python doesn't treat the second backslash as an escape
character.
Recall from the strings lecture that escape characters with that backslash have some sort of letter
afterwards indicating a special code such as a new line or a tab.
Since Windows by itself has backslashes for file locations we want to make sure that Python doesn't
try to read the next letter after the backslash as some sort of special character.
So to fix the issue we just have two sets of backslashes essentially escaping the second backslash.
So if you're on a Windows computer your file path is going to look something like this as a string.
You'll say See.
Go to users your username and then find the file path to your text file and instead of passing in just
the file that text.
If the text file is located on a different folder in your computer apart from where this notebook is
located you can just passen the entire file path here.
Now for Mac OS and Linux users you're actually going to use single slashes in the opposite direction
so your file path is going to look something like this and your file path when you type that PWT was
probably reported to you in this manner as well.
OK so that's how you can call files that are located anywhere on your computer for both operating systems.
So finally let's see a full example using what we've learned so far.
We're going say my file We're going to open the test file that 60 I'm going to say lines is equal to
my file and then I'm going to read this.
Let's make sure we have a Y here and then I'm going to print lines or remember lines.
Actually has this special new line escape code so we should see this print out 4 lines and then finally
we will say my file and we will close the file.
Remember to always close the file once you open opening it so you run this.
And here we see the four lines of the file.
So I just mentioned that you have to close files after opening them so you don't have Python constantly
having a file open.
Otherwise when you're working if it somewhere else in your operating system you may not be able to edit
it or delete it.
So for best practice there's actually the with statements and the with statement allows you to open
the files and not worry about having to close them.
So let's show you how you can use that.
You can say with open and the pass and the file path.
In this case I'll just say test file that text and then you say as and then whatever variable you want
the file to be called will say my file.
And then you have a colon.
So so far we'll say with open the text file as the variable name.
So this is an alternative to using the first line here.
And because we're using with now we don't need to worry about closing the file.
Instead what's going to happen is we're going to write a colon.
And when you hit enter you'll notice indentation happens.
So now you can have an indented block of code and all that code will execute whatever is indented beyond
this call right here and then once that block of code isn't executing we will automatically close the
file so we can then say lines is equal to my file read.
So we've been able to open this file as my file and then lines set that variable equal to my file that
read and the file has been automatically closed with the with statement.
And lucky for us we already defined the lines here in this which means we can still call it outside
of this with statement.
Now I can see that giant string which if I just call the string itself is the same thing we got last
time.
Finally let's discuss reading and writing options.
There's actually different modes that you can open a file with by default the mode is to read it.
So if you do shift tab here again that's shift tab with my cursor here in the open.
You'll notice that there is a mode parameter set to the string R and this indicates that we're opening
the file for reading only so the file pointers place the beginning of the file.
And this is actually the default mode of opening a file.
However you can also write to a file and to do that.
You can set the mode to the string w.
You can check out the notebook that corresponds to this lesson for various other modes.
There is reading mode reading and writing writing writing and reading and then a for appending and then
there's also B notes or B modes.
I should say RB and WB and the Cate's reading or writing in a binary format bullies that when we discuss
things like c a c files are pedia files.
Let's show you how you can write to a file.
So I'll say F is equal to open and we're going to open the second file.
TIA XTi and will indicate that mode is equal to read which is the default mode.
And then we will read this and see that we have only one line inside this file.
Then we will say
f close that file and I'm going to try opening this again.
Second file the text and the mode is again going to be R for reading.
Or you can just set it to the default meaning just don't bother passing anything here.
It's the same idea.
And then I'm going to attempt to use the right command and I'm going to write a new line onto this file.
Now notice what happened here.
I got unsupported operation not ridable.
That's because I didn't pass in the mode indicating that I have permission to write to this file to
do that.
You can say mode is equal to W or you can just pass in as a second premire here w.
It's up to you whether you want to include mode as equals are or just R or just w.
So once you've done that we can write a new line to this.
You'll see some sort of output indicating that the write was successful and then we can close this file.
And let's go ahead and check it out.
We'll say with open second file text as
Prince if read.
And when we were that we can see we have that new line.
Now you may be wondering what happened to the original line.
Only one line it seems.
Now we're only getting back a new line.
Well the reason that happened is because when you use the W mode that right mode opens a file for writing
only.
But it also overwrites the file if the file exists and or the file doesn't exist.
That actually creates a new file for writing.
So let me explore this idea a little further with you will say with open and we're going to make up
some text file that's definitely not here.
So I just want a bunch of random letters that text and then I'm going to say w as my mode then say as
f and I'm going to writes a new file made and run this.
And you'll notice that there was no errors in effect.
Now I can actually open this and I can begin to type this out and see if I can tab autocomplete that.
So going to open this with just the default permissions and then print out after read and I can see
new file was made there.
If I already have an existing file that I want to add or append to instead of overwriting then the correct
the mode to do that is the a mode or append mode.
So I can say with open and it was passen that crazy pathing and so tab autocomplete that.
And then I will indicate that my mode is a.
There's also a plus which indicates the opening for both appending and reading will just append right
now.
And I will say as F and then we are going to say F dot.
Right.
And then we'll say some other line do shift enter to run that.
And then if we say with open again tab autocomplete that and we'll just have it in read only mode as
f if I say Prince F..
Read notice.
Now I have a new file made some other line if I wanted to actually add in a new line.
What I could have done here is pasan that New Line special characters indicate that there's going to
be a line break.
So if we run this again that is now I added in the other line.
OK.
You can check out the notebook for the various other method modes but essentially it's are for reading
our plus for reading and writing W for writing only.
And remember that's going to overwrite the file or create a new one.
There'll be a plus for writing and reading and then if you need to append to an existing file use the
a method or if you want to append and read during this block of code you can use a plus.
All right.
That's it for your First of recruitment trials upcoming.
Is your field readiness exam.
Best of luck on that recruit.
I'll see you at the next lesson.